The Grassland Protocol conducts long-term vegetation monitoring in ten Southern Plains Network parks: Bent’s Old Fort National Historic Site, Capulin Volcano National Monument, Chickasaw National Recreation Area, Fort Larned National Historical Site, Fort Union National Monument, Lake Meredith National Recreation Area, Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park, Pecos National Historical Park, Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site and Washita Battlefield National Historic Site. The target population is the grassland communities of each park, defined as areas with greater than 60% graminoid cover, or areas managed with the intention of achieving 60% or greater graminoid cover. We have also placed plots in vegetation communities of special concern to specific parks, such as the cottonwood galleries at BEOL, LAMR, and SAND.  The sampling unit is an approximately 1-acre sized, oval plot, with a 50-m transect running down the middle. The current plot count is 120, spread out over 10 parks. Plots are visited every two out of every three years. The sampling design is a stratified, random sample. Plots were stratified by vegetation type, using park vegetation maps, or, for select parks, strata were defined by management history. References for the vegetation community classification and spatial data (vegetation mapping units) used in our study are included in the PlotVisits metadata.

The Grassland monitoring protocol for the Southern Plains I&M Network and Fire Group: Narrative Version 1.00, is a written description of the study proposal and methodology, as well as a description of the parks and ecosystems included in the study population (https://irma.nps.gov/DataStore/Reference/Profile/2248040). The initial field data collection methods are detailed in the Grassland Monitoring Protocol and Standard Operating Procedures for the Southern Plains I&M Network and Fire Group (https://irma.nps.gov/DataStore/Reference/Profile/2218674). The study proposal and standard operating procedures (SOP’s) have since been extensively updated, and a full version history of the field SOP’s has been published to Data Store. The ProtocolVersions table includes references for each SOP version used in each field season.

Permanent plots must meet the criteria for establishment before inclusion into the long-term study. Plots must be fully within their designated strata and 50 m away from buildings, roads or trails. Two rebar monuments are established to mark either end of the 50-m transect, with one monument labeled as the transect origin and one as the transect endpoint. At each sampling event, a field crew surveys for vegetation cover and frequency, canopy closure and disturbance. The crew begins each visit by taking plot photos down the length of the transect from either end. Each photo has a photo board labeled with the plot and park name, date and direction of the photo (for example, a direction of 0P to 50P indicates that the photo was taken at transect origin point and faces the transect endpoint).

The transect line is sampled using a line-point intercept method described in the published field SOP’s. A 50-m tape is stretched from the origin rebar monument to the endpoint and point-intercepts are taken every 30 cm, beginning at the 0.3-meter mark. From 2010-2023, the first 30 meters were surveyed, and from 2024 on, we surveyed the full 50 m. At each sampling point, we record all intercepted species belonging to the shrub/herbaceous canopy layer (defined in the metadata) as well as the soil substrate. The shrub/herbaceous layer includes tree species as well, if the tree being intercepted is 2 m or shorter in height. Beginning in 2022, we began recording intercepts of trees taller than 2 m in height, and these are designated as belonging to the tree canopy layer in the data. The height of the tallest intercepted species belonging to the shrub/herbaceous canopy layer is recorded at each sampling point. Intercepts are recorded for living, vascular plants, while intercepts of standing, dead vegetation are not recorded unless the vegetation is of the current growth year, such as senesced annual species. Dead branches of shrubs and trees are recorded as intercepts of living plants, but not intercepts of dead herbaceous leaves, stems or branches (unless they are of the current growth year). In 2023, plant bases were added as a substrate type (previously recorded as litter), and light cyanobacterial crust was added to the crust substrate type (previously recorded as bare).

The Circular Quadrat method is used to sample presence/absence and ocular cover of plant species in small plots. Our protocol initially used the Divided Quadrat method for such measurements, until this procedure was dropped from our sampling in 2016 and replaced with Circular Quadrats in 2022. The quadrats are 1-m-radius circles and 10 are sampled per plot. The quadrats are randomly placed within 25 m of the transect line (creating a 1-acre-sized, oval plot), and a new set is generated for each sampling event. All living plants rooted at least halfway within the quadrat are recorded. Cover from overhanging shrubs and trees rooted more than halfway outside the plot is also recorded and designated as overhead canopy in the data. In 2022, ocular cover was estimated for each species to the nearest 5%. In 2023, ocular cover was estimated with a series of cover classes. Cover estimates were dropped from the procedure in 2024 and we began recording presence/absence only.

In 2024, we added a field method to measure canopy closure along our transect lines, using a spherical concave densiometer. This was in response to the amount of woody encroachment in our eastern parks and increased wildfire in our cottonwood galleries. At four points along the transect line, 4 measurements are taken. Observers hold the densiometer at elbow height, with their forehead just visible in the reflection, and count the number of intersections (out of 17) where vegetation is present. Measurements are taken in four directions, to capture the canopy closure of a full circle.

Plot disturbance is common to our plots, as they are in actively managed, front-country grasslands. Mowing, prescribed burns, wildfire and flooding have all occurred during our sampling period. Fire, either wild or prescribed, is documented in the FireEvents table, and is recorded for all affected plots, whether they were sampled that year or not. Mowing, flooding and other types of disturbance are recorded at each sampling event. Beginning in 2024, disturbance was recorded using tape meter marks for the transect line and quadrat numbers. Before that, it was recorded more generally, by estimating the percent of the plot affected. If we knew that the plot was affected by disturbance but not the exact tape meter marks or quads, the disturbance location is recorded in the data as “unknown.”

Data are recorded directly into a field laptop and uploaded to a Microsoft Access database. Where possible, pick lists and domain restraints are used to prevent errors in data collection and entry. A series of QAQC queries is performed in the field at the end of each plot, designed to ensure data were collected at all points and are within range. Additionally, a list of species codes recorded at the plot is generated for the crew to review and verify before leaving the site. During data certification, data undergo an extensive, automated QAQC process coded in R, to further check for missing values, duplicate values, values that are out of range, etc.  Corrections and remaining errors are flagged directly in the database. Data are also flagged for quality. Flat file generation is done in R.